README.md, before:

# Postwhite - Automatic Postcreen Whitelist & Blacklist Generator
A script for generating a Postscreen whitelist (and optionally a blacklist) based on large and presumably trustworthy senders' SPF records.

# Why Postwhite?
Postwhite uses the published SPF records from domains of known webmailers, social networks, ecommerce providers, and compliant bulk senders to generate a list of outbound mailer IP addresses and CIDR ranges to create a whitelist (and optionally a blacklist) for Postfix's Postscreen.

This allows Postscreen to save time and resources by immediately handing off whitelisted connections from these hosts (which we can somewhat safely presume are properly configured) to Postfix's smtpd process for further action. Blacklisted hosts are rejected before they reach Postfix's smtpd process.

Note this does *not* whitelist (or blacklist) email messages from any of these hosts. A whitelist for Postscreen (which is merely the first line of Postfix's defense) merely allows listed hosts to connect to Postfix without further tests to prove they are properly configured and/or legitimate senders. A Postscreen blacklist does nothing but reject the connection based on the blacklisted host's IP.

If all of the whitelist mailers are selected when Postwhite runs, the resulting whitelist includes over 500 outbound mail servers, all of which  have a very high probability of being properly configured.

# Warning about Blacklisting
By default, Postwhite has blacklisting turned off. Most users will not need to ever turn it on, but it's there if you *really* believe you need it. If you choose to enable it, make sure you understand the implications of blacklisting IP addresses based on their hostnames and associated mailers, and re-run Postwhite often via cron to make sure you're not inadvertently blocking legitimate senders.

# Requirements
Postwhite runs as a **Bash** script and relies on two scripts from the <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/jsarenik/spf-tools">SPF-Tools</a> project (**despf.sh** and **simplify.sh**) to help recursively query SPF records. I recommend cloning or copying the entire SPF-Tools repo to ```/usr/local/bin``` on your system, then confirming the ```spftoolspath``` value in ```postwhite```.

**Please update SPF-Tools whenever you update Postwhite, as both are under continuous development, and sometimes new features of Postwhite depend upon an updated version of SPF-Tools. The 
minimum version number of SPF-Tools required is included near the top of the ```postwhite``` script.**

# Usage
Once you have spf-tools available on your system, run ```./postwhite``` from the command line. I recommend cloning the entire repo into ```/usr/local/bin/```. Once you're satisfied with its performance, set a daily cron job to pick up any new hosts in the mailers' SPF records, such as this:

    @daily /usr/local/bin/postwhite/postwhite > /dev/null 2>&1 #Update Postscreen Whitelists

When executed, Postwhite will generate a file named ```postscreen_spf_whitelist.cidr```, write it to your Postfix directory, then optionally reload Postfix to pick up any changes.

Add the filename of your whitelist (and optionally your blacklist) to the ```postscreen_access_list``` option in your Postfix ```main.cf``` file, like this:

    postscreen_access_list = permit_mynetworks,
    ...
            cidr:/etc/postfix/postscreen_spf_whitelist.cidr,
            cidr:/etc/postfix/postscreen_spf_blacklist.cidr,
    ...

**IMPORTANT:** If you choose to enable blacklisting, list the blacklist file *after* the whitelist file in ```main.cf```, as shown above. If you misconfigure Postwhite and an IP address inadvertently finds its way onto both lists, the first entry "wins." Listing the whitelist file first in ```main.cf``` will assure that whitelisted hosts aren't blacklisted, even if they appear in the blacklist file. 

Then do a manual ```postfix reload``` or re-run ```./postwhite``` to build a fresh whitelist and automatically reload Postfix.

# Options
To make managing whitelisted hosts easier, Postwhite splits trusted mailers into five categories: **webmailers**, **ecommerce**, **social networks**, **bulk senders**, and **other/miscellaneous** hosts. Trusted webmailers, for example, are listed in the ```webmail_hosts``` option, separated by a single space:

    webmail_hosts="aol.com google.com microsoft.com outlook.com hotmail.com gmx.com icloud.com mail.com inbox.com zoho.com"

The categories don't really matter, and exist only to make organizing your list of trusted hosts easier. You can add and remove any host to or from any category you choose.

Additional mailers are added to the script from time to time, so check back periodically for new versions, or "Watch" this repo to receive update notifications.

To enable blacklisting, set ```enable_blacklist=yes``` and then list blacklisted hosts in ```blacklist_hosts```. Please refer to the blacklisting warning above. Blacklisting is not the primary purpose of Postwhite, and most users will never need to turn it on.

By default, the option to simplify (remove) invididual IP addresses that are already included in CIDR ranges (handled by the SPT-Tools ```simplify.sh``` script) is set to **no**. Turning this feature on when building a whitelist for more than just a few mailers *dramatically* adds to the processing time required to run Postwhite. Feel free to turn it on to see how it affects the amount of time required to build your whitelist, but if you're whitelisting more than just 3 or 4 mailers, you'll probably want to turn it to "no" again. Having a handful of individual IP addresses in your whitelist that might be redundantly covered by CIDR ranges won't have any appreciable impact on Postscreen's performance.

You can also choose how to handle malformed or invalid CIDR ranges that appear in the mailers' SPF records (which happens more often than it should). The options are:

* **remove** - the default action, it removes the invalid CIDR range so it doesn't appear in the whitelist.
* **keep** - this keeps the invalid CIDR range in the whitelist. Postfix will log a warning about ```non-null host address bits```, suggest the closest valid range with a matching prefix length, and harmlessly ignore the rule. Useful only if you want to see which mailers are less than careful about their SPF records (cough, cough, *Microsoft*, cough, cough).
* **fix** - this option will change the invalid CIDR to the closest valid range (the same one suggested by Postfix, in fact) and include the corrected CIDR range in the whitelist.

Other options include changing the filenames for your whitelist & blacklist, Postfix location, spf-tools path location, and whether or not to automatically reload Postfix after you've generated a new list.

# Credits
* Special thanks to Mike Miller for his 2013 <a target="_blank" href="https://archive.mgm51.com/sources/gwhitelist.html">gwhitelist script</a> that initially got me tinkering with SPF-based Postscreen whitelists. The temp file creation and ```printf``` statement near the end of the Postwhite script are remnants of his original script.
* Thanks to Jan Sarenik (author of <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/jsarenik/spf-tools">SPF-Tools</a>).
* Thanks to <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/jcbf">Jose Borges Ferreira</a> for patches and contributions to Postwhite, include internal code to validate CIDRs.
* Thanks to partner (business... not life) <a target="_blank" href="http://stevecook.net/">Steve Cook</a> for helping me cludge through Bash scripting, which really isn't my bag.

# More Info
My blog post discussing how Postwhite came to be is here:

http://www.stevejenkins.com/blog/2015/11/postscreen-whitelisting-smtp-outbound-ip-addresses-large-webmail-providers/

# Known Issues
* I'd love to include Yahoo's IPs in the whitelist, but their SPF record doesn't support queries to expose their netblocks. The closest thing I can find to a published list from Yahoo is here: https://help.yahoo.com/kb/SLN23997.html. I don't know how often it's updated, but it's as good a starting point as any. I'm currently working on a way to scrape those IPs and include them in the whitelist. If you have a suggestion for a more elegant solution, please create an issue and let me know!

* I have no way of validating IPv6 CIDRs yet. For now, the script assumes all SPF-published IPv6 CIDRs are valid and includes them in the whitelist.

* I've improved the sorting by doing the ```uniq``` separately, after the sort. ```sort -u -V``` is still ideal, but it the ```-V``` option doesn't exist on all platforms (OSX doesn't support it, for example). For now, I can live with the two-step ```sort``` and ```uniq```, even though the final output splits the IPv6 address into two grips: those that start with letters and numbers (2a00, 2a01, etc.) at the top, and those that start with numbers only (2001, 2004, etc.) at the bottom. All the IPv4 addresses in the middle are sorted properly. See the **testdata** directory for examples of different sorting attempts or to play around with your own attempts at sorting. If you have any suggestions to improve the sorting without losing any data, I'm all ears!

# Suggestions for Additional Mailers
If you're a Postfix admin who sees a good number of ```PASS OLD``` entries for Postscreen in your mail logs, and have a suggestion for an additional mail host that might be a good candidate to include in Postwhite, please comment on this issue: https://github.com/stevejenkins/postwhite/issues/2

# Disclaimer
You are totally responsible for anything this script does to your system. Whether it launches a nice game of Tic Tac Toe or global thermonuclear war, you're on your own. :)

Commit message:

Moved options to external postwhite.conf file (fixes Issue #15)

README.md, after:

# Postwhite - Automatic Postcreen Whitelist & Blacklist Generator
A script for generating a Postscreen whitelist (and optionally a blacklist) based on large and presumably trustworthy senders' SPF records.

# Why Postwhite?
Postwhite uses the published SPF records from domains of known webmailers, social networks, ecommerce providers, and compliant bulk senders to generate a list of outbound mailer IP addresses and CIDR ranges to create a whitelist (and optionally a blacklist) for Postfix's Postscreen.

This allows Postscreen to save time and resources by immediately handing off whitelisted connections from these hosts (which we can somewhat safely presume are properly configured) to Postfix's smtpd process for further action. Blacklisted hosts are rejected before they reach Postfix's smtpd process.

Note this does *not* whitelist (or blacklist) email messages from any of these hosts. A whitelist for Postscreen (which is merely the first line of Postfix's defense) merely allows listed hosts to connect to Postfix without further tests to prove they are properly configured and/or legitimate senders. A Postscreen blacklist does nothing but reject the connection based on the blacklisted host's IP.

If all of the whitelist mailers are selected when Postwhite runs, the resulting whitelist includes over 500 outbound mail servers, all of which  have a very high probability of being properly configured.

# Warning about Blacklisting
By default, Postwhite has blacklisting turned off. Most users will not need to ever turn it on, but it's there if you *really* believe you need it. If you choose to enable it, make sure you understand the implications of blacklisting IP addresses based on their hostnames and associated mailers, and re-run Postwhite often via cron to make sure you're not inadvertently blocking legitimate senders.

# Requirements
Postwhite runs as a **Bash** script and relies on two scripts from the <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/jsarenik/spf-tools">SPF-Tools</a> project (**despf.sh** and **simplify.sh**) to help recursively query SPF records. I recommend cloning or copying the entire SPF-Tools repo to ```/usr/local/bin``` on your system, then confirming the ```spftoolspath``` value in ```postwhite```.

**Please update SPF-Tools whenever you update Postwhite, as both are under continuous development, and sometimes new features of Postwhite depend upon an updated version of SPF-Tools. The 
minimum version number of SPF-Tools required is included near the top of the ```postwhite``` script.**

# Usage
1. Make sure you have SPF-Toolson your system
2. Move the ```postwhite.conf``` file to your `/etc/` directory
3. Add any custom hosts in ```postwhite.conf```
4. Run ```./postwhite``` from the command line.

I recommend cloning both the SPF-Tools and the Postwhite repos into your ```/usr/local/bin/``` directory. Once you're satisfied with its performance, set a daily cron job to pick up any new hosts in the mailers' SPF records like this:

    @daily /usr/local/bin/postwhite/postwhite > /dev/null 2>&1 #Update Postscreen Whitelists

When executed, Postwhite will generate a file named ```postscreen_spf_whitelist.cidr```, write it to your Postfix directory, then reload Postfix to pick up any changes.

Add the filename of your whitelist (and optionally your blacklist) to the ```postscreen_access_list``` option in your Postfix ```main.cf``` file, like this:

    postscreen_access_list = permit_mynetworks,
    ...
            cidr:/etc/postfix/postscreen_spf_whitelist.cidr,
            cidr:/etc/postfix/postscreen_spf_blacklist.cidr,
    ...

**IMPORTANT:** If you choose to enable blacklisting, list the blacklist file *after* the whitelist file in ```main.cf```, as shown above. If you misconfigure Postwhite and an IP address inadvertently finds its way onto both lists, the first entry "wins." Listing the whitelist file first in ```main.cf``` will assure that whitelisted hosts aren't blacklisted, even if they appear in the blacklist file. 

Then do a manual ```postfix reload``` or re-run ```./postwhite``` to build a fresh whitelist and automatically reload Postfix.

# Options
Options for Postwhite are located in the ```postwhite.conf``` file. This file shoud be moved to your system's ```/etc/``` directory before running Postwhite for the first time.

## Custom Hosts
By default, Postwhite includes a number of well-known (and presumably trustworthy) mailers in five categories:

* Webmailers
* Ecommerce
* Social Networks
* Bulk Senders
* Miscellaneous

To add your own additional custom hosts, add them to the ```custom_hosts``` section of ```/etc/postwhite.conf``` separated by a single space:

    custom_hosts="aol.com google.com microsoft.com yahoo.com"

Additional trusted mailers are added to the script from time to time, so check back periodically for new versions, or "Watch" this repo to receive update notifications.

## Blacklisting
To enable blacklisting, set ```enable_blacklist=yes``` and then list blacklisted hosts in ```blacklist_hosts```. Please refer to the blacklisting warning above. Blacklisting is not the primary purpose of Postwhite, and most users will never need to turn it on.

## Simplify
By default, the option to simplify (remove) invididual IP addresses that are already included in CIDR ranges (handled by the SPT-Tools ```simplify.sh``` script) is set to **no**. Turning this feature on when building a whitelist for more than just a few mailers *dramatically* adds to the processing time required to run Postwhite. Feel free to turn it on to see how it affects the amount of time required to build your whitelist, but if you're whitelisting more than just 3 or 4 mailers, you'll probably want to turn it to "no" again. Having a handful of individual IP addresses in your whitelist that might be redundantly covered by CIDR ranges won't have any appreciable impact on Postscreen's performance.

## Invalid hosts
You can also choose how to handle malformed or invalid CIDR ranges that appear in the mailers' SPF records (which happens more often than it should). The options are:

* **remove** - the default action, it removes the invalid CIDR range so it doesn't appear in the whitelist.
* **keep** - this keeps the invalid CIDR range in the whitelist. Postfix will log a warning about ```non-null host address bits```, suggest the closest valid range with a matching prefix length, and harmlessly ignore the rule. Useful only if you want to see which mailers are less than careful about their SPF records (cough, cough, *Microsoft*, cough, cough).
* **fix** - this option will change the invalid CIDR to the closest valid range (the same one suggested by Postfix, in fact) and include the corrected CIDR range in the whitelist.

Other options in ```postwhite.conf``` include changing the filenames for your whitelist & blacklist, Postfix path, SPF-Tools path, and whether or not to automatically reload Postfix after you've generated a new list.

# Credits
* Special thanks to Mike Miller for his 2013 <a target="_blank" href="https://archive.mgm51.com/sources/gwhitelist.html">gwhitelist script</a> that initially got me tinkering with SPF-based Postscreen whitelists. The temp file creation and ```printf``` statement near the end of the Postwhite script are remnants of his original script.
* Thanks to Jan Sarenik (author of <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/jsarenik/spf-tools">SPF-Tools</a>).
* Thanks to <a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/jcbf">Jose Borges Ferreira</a> for patches and contributions to Postwhite, include internal code to validate CIDRs.
* Thanks to partner (business... not life) <a target="_blank" href="http://stevecook.net/">Steve Cook</a> for helping me cludge through Bash scripting, which really isn't my bag.

# More Info
My blog post discussing how Postwhite came to be is here:

http://www.stevejenkins.com/blog/2015/11/postscreen-whitelisting-smtp-outbound-ip-addresses-large-webmail-providers/

# Known Issues
* I'd love to include Yahoo's IPs in the whitelist, but their SPF record doesn't support queries to expose their netblocks. The closest thing I can find to a published list from Yahoo is here: https://help.yahoo.com/kb/SLN23997.html. I don't know how often it's updated, but it's as good a starting point as any. I'm currently working on a way to scrape those IPs and include them in the whitelist. If you have a suggestion for a more elegant solution, please create an issue and let me know!

* I have no way of validating IPv6 CIDRs yet. For now, the script assumes all SPF-published IPv6 CIDRs are valid and includes them in the whitelist.

* I've improved the sorting by doing the ```uniq``` separately, after the sort. ```sort -u -V``` is still ideal, but it the ```-V``` option doesn't exist on all platforms (OSX doesn't support it, for example). For now, I can live with the two-step ```sort``` and ```uniq```, even though the final output splits the IPv6 address into two grips: those that start with letters and numbers (2a00, 2a01, etc.) at the top, and those that start with numbers only (2001, 2004, etc.) at the bottom. All the IPv4 addresses in the middle are sorted properly. See the **testdata** directory for examples of different sorting attempts or to play around with your own attempts at sorting. If you have any suggestions to improve the sorting without losing any data, I'm all ears!

# Suggestions for Additional Mailers
If you're a Postfix admin who sees a good number of ```PASS OLD``` entries for Postscreen in your mail logs, and have a suggestion for an additional mail host that might be a good candidate to include in Postwhite, please comment on this issue: https://github.com/stevejenkins/postwhite/issues/2

# Disclaimer
You are totally responsible for anything this script does to your system. Whether it launches a nice game of Tic Tac Toe or global thermonuclear war, you're on your own. :)
